As you guys know, I'm mostly in the Žižek, and increasingly these days the Catherine Malabou
line, where it's like, I'm kind of giving him the benefit of the doubt on a lot of these
sections where it seems like he's either being, you know, an essentialist or whatever, problematic.
And I'm basically like, no, at least my tendency when I'm reading is like, no, this is actually
talking about, you know, the effects of contingency on our ability to think, you know.
So that's the general method of reading that I'm kind of running with at this point.
Yeah, so I'm interested, so I definitely want to read the Malabou that you're talking about
as well as the Zizek.
I'm just wondering if there's something out there beyond like, I mean, the sort of, it's
really kind of small moments in Deleuze and, well, Derrida, I mean, Galah is all about Hegel.
But generally speaking, I kind of want to read the book, which is sort of what's terrifying
and bad about Hegel too, right?
Like I want, I'd like to, I'd like to get that book because, if it exists, because I do
find myself really, really vacillating.
Again, vacillating is not even exactly a great word.
I mean, I'm actually just doing exactly the Hegelian movement, you know, which is I have
a sort of skepticism and then I reflect on my skepticism and that produces a different
kind of interaction.
So I find it, I really do find it both fascinating and terrifying and I'm not yet clear why.
I mean, all I'm, effectively all I'm doing is trying to raise something from sort of sense
certainty, which is I have this vague sense that something's really scary about this.
to like self-conscious reflection so that I can articulate what that, I mean, that's really
all I'm trying to glean is to figure out what is, what is the, what is a precise way of rendering
my responses to this, both, both the fascination and, and compulsion and, and wonder and, and
the like, uh, real strong allergic hesitation.
That's a good point because I think that's the one thing that, especially if you're
Malabou misses, I think Žižek actually does kind of hit on the terrifying nature of Hegel
and that's part of what's interesting for him.
And that's, that's what I would push even further.
Like the, the terrifying aspect is actually what draws me in.
Like it's the, it's the darkness, like the sort of ominous feeling you get from the project,
the tone of the project, the structure of the whole thing, the language that, uh, actually
draws me in and, you know, whatever you want to say about him, you can't really critique
the force of thinking.
Right.
We were talking about that, that, uh, last week.
And so like, again, like, what does that mean for us?
Like those, all those snippets that Foucault and Derrida have, um, about his like longstanding
influence, like I just, I'm, I'm always just thinking like that, this means that we're, if
we're still on the horizon of his thinking, then we can never really get out of the, the
identity politics bubble that Nathaniel was talking about last week.
Like, there's no real way of like, at least for me, like in, in terms of your guys, like
sort of, uh, uh, not deference, but your preference for someone like Deleuze, I struggle to see
the hope in, in, in a system of thought like this, like the, the Nietzschean, even there's
like more hope in Nietzsche than there is in Hegel, you know?
I see.
I just, I don't think of it, I mean, I don't think of it as hope.
I just think of it as joy, you know, um, it's, but I mean, we'll have to sort of parse
that out as, as we go along.
If nothing else, one of the things that this lends me towards, I remember having this conversation
with, uh, John Storr, who's a philosopher at Emory and he's a pragmatist.
And I remember having a conversation with him at one point and it's like, I mean, his claim,
and I kind of agree with it, although I didn't really understand at the time, it was a while
ago.
He's like, look, it's, it's kind of, you know, the question of philosophy and which philosophers,
you know, you follow or that you're inclined towards.
It's truly no different than a question of, do you like heavy metal or rap or country?
It's just no different.
You know, it is in that sense, it's just a kind of dispositional, you know, it's obviously
kind of cultural, uh, but dispositional as well in terms of, there isn't a question of
one of them being right.
It's just like, Hey, I like, uh, I like drum beats.
They compel me as opposed to, I like electric guitar.
I'm thinking of the Dave Chappelle thing of like white people can't dance and John Mayer
playing guitar and all the white people dance, right?
Like, uh, you know, with electric guitar versus, uh, drums versus, you know, keyboards.
And it's, it is that kind of taste preference.
And, you know, while we want to think of the cognitive as being something elevated or distinct
from that, that's actually what it is, you know, is, is just a sort of different variation
of a taste question.
Yeah.
Your point about like sort of deconstructing your own taste and your own, uh, sort of whatever
preference for, for some of these thinkers.
I mean, just, just like a very simple kind of diagnosis of myself.
Like, no, we never read Hegel in, in classes.
No, Hegel is nobody's like boy really in rhetoric.
So I think, uh, for, you know, just an arbitrary, maybe even a kind of vulgar contrarian reason,
I just sort of chose him, uh, like chose to follow that path.
I know, I get, I, I actually quite get that.
I mean, I, I remember when I was in grad school, I did a similar kind of thing of, I remember
one point I spent like a month just kind of going around and my primary guiding thought
was what's wrong with metaphysics?
Like, why is everybody trying to beat up on metaphysics or probably like, what's wrong
with metaphysics?
Um, and you know, like for exactly that kind of contrarian, although contrarian is a little
too strong of a term.
I wasn't taking a dogmatic position and neither are you, right?
Which is just, well, let's presume, why do we presume that this is a bad figure or a bad
movement?
You know, why do we presume?
And, and I look, look, even for someone like me that feels, you know, kind of very much an
affinity for, uh, um, a quasi oppositional discourse to the Hegelian.
I'm in, I'm fascinated by the Hegelian thing.
And I, I really, I find myself like really drawn and compelled.
Um, and I do, I mean, I remember that I told you the story about Charles Scott last time
and it's, I, I, I kind of get what he's saying, which is like, it's compelling and fascinating.
And yet it's something that I, I kind of want to keep it at arm's length because it's kind
of like, once you enter into the logic of it, there is no exit.
And, and so to me, that's a really important caution for why not to enter into the logic
of it.
Like, I just don't, I don't trust things that explain everything.
I just have a, um, for whatever reason, it just makes me, it makes like psychoanalysis.
I feel the same way about psychoanalysis because psychoanalysis can explain everything.
And I'm like, I kind of, I just don't trust things that can, and by the way, not that
it's wrong.
It's precisely that it's absolutely right about every goddamn detail that I go,
you know, it becomes such a tool to then implement and, and then, uh, produce thoughtless actions
from, right?
A unit, like a universal hermeneutic.
It's, uh, you know, I mean, I think of the claim Nietzsche made in Ecce Homo about Birth
of Tragedy where, uh, I mean, he, he said like, you know, he says it smells offensively Hegelian,
but there's also a comment there about like something that it fits neatly into every school
boy's system.
That's, that's how he thinks of the, the Hegelian dialectic is it's, it's a kind of school boy
system that anyone, and that there are like legions of philosophers running around doing
sort of the dialectical movement thing.
And it's, it's, it's undoubtedly infinitely generative.
It just doesn't seem like it's generative of anything different, right?
That it, it just shows you new moments in the, in the sort of motivation of spirit.
Yeah, and, and that whole, the whole hesitance around that totalizing impulse, um, that we've
been talking about, I mean, you see, you see Butler reckoning with that, like in almost
all of her, especially her earlier books, Bodies of Matter, um, and her first book, Subjects
of Desire, and it's, the move that she makes is the one that I think we're saying you basically
can't make, and she tries to call them out for being wrong, um, both, well, especially
Lacan, she's like, this is, this is too totalizing, it doesn't actually fit logically, um, into
this system, we need to, you basically insert historicity into this to account for contingency
as opposed to just alighting it or destroying it, and it's like, you can't call them out for
that, because it's, it's always incorporable, like, the way that it's, it's framed in both
Lacan and in Hegel, the, the whole idea of concrete universality is the, the, like, the
toggling between those two, the constant, like, sort of pressure and balance between
those, so Butler's way out is, like, not really, uh, tenable, um, yeah.
I think that's an interesting way of thinking, because, I mean, I was saying it sort of that
way, but I like the notion of toggling between the concrete and the universal, which I always
thought of as, like, it's either a moment or it's, you know, it's either a moment or it's
part of the process, and it was shifting back and forth between those two, and maybe that
kind of gets it, that I, I feel like a toggle, meaning the sort of both and, that's not a
very good resolution of, of a problem, um, or it's, it's kind of a, I mean, I think not
in, I'm not in Hegel, because I, I do still find it fascinating, but I, you read that move
a lot, where people are, scholars are faced with, like, whatever the little decision is
in their area, it's like, well, it's either this or it's that, and their solution is almost
universally, well, it's both, and I'm like, well, Jesus, that doesn't, I mean, to me, that's
always a unsatisfying answer. Yeah. Not because it's wrong, but just because it's so easy, it's
like, that doesn't really tell you anything. Sort of boring, yeah. Form is content. Like,
what does that do for you? Yeah, like, oh, great, form is content. Now, like, that doesn't,
so, I mean, again, I feel like what they're failing to do there is, is assume the responsibility
for building something different, you know, for building a different conceptual edifice. They're
just saying, given the conceptual edifice and the existence of binaries, we just take
both, and I'm like, well, that just brings all of the, for me, when I hear that, you know,
whatever problems exist on each side of that binary, you're just importing all of them now
for, for both sides, so you're not solving a problem, you're just having double the number
Of problems, you know, it's either subject or object, it's both, like, eh. It's like, you
need the first step, right? That's the first step to say that they're, you know, it's both
and, but it doesn't go far enough because that erases it. It doesn't say, okay, what is the
particular way these two things are connected? And it's the particularity of that connection,
so, you know, the kind of toggling that we're talking about here is, you know, the very specific
way that the moment is connected to the, it gets universalized into a transcendent process,
right? And, like, it's, it's, you know, the both and move is so unsatisfying, I think, because
it's constantly saying, you know, this doesn't hold, and then it doesn't make the next step and say,
here's how the binary is effected, and what kinds of things spin out from it.
And, and my inclination recently, and maybe for the last couple years, even, I haven't really
noticed it, is to lean into the term that we're not supposed to endorse. Like, so, as opposed to
difference, I'm leaning into unity, or I'm leaning into totality, universality, subjectivity,
transcendence, all these terms that we're supposed to have basically gone away with. Like, I've tasked
myself, for whatever reason, like, how do we ring, or, you know, get a, an actually, not responsible,
but interesting version of thinking, conceptuality, or contingency out of those concepts. And at least
at a, you know, at a basic level, it's by leaning into them, like, reflexively. Like, you constantly
turn those over and see how they're affecting your thinking. You don't just refuse transcendence,
right? Like, you, if you do that, you're, you're ignoring, uh, that tendency in yourself, in your,
in discourse, in thinking. So, yeah, that's where I've been at.
It's like, how do you, how do you hang on to the, uh, I'm thinking of this just because I read,
um, Amber's chapter on the monument stuff. You've read it, Nate. I, uh, yeah. And to, you know,
the critiques of the Confederate monuments are that this is a very exclusionary version of history.
And we want, in the terminology of the protesters, we want a more inclusive version of that history.
Um, but of course that, you know, that more inclusive version means not more inclusive,
just differently inclusive. So, for instance, here's one of the things that they believe needs
to be excluded. White nationalism, right? That's something that needs to be excluded. And politically,
I 100% agree with that. But I also recognize that's an exclusion. You know, that you're, you're saying
we no longer find, you know, white nationalism acceptable. So, how can you create a monument
that both holds on to the white nationalism behind the Confederate statues and a critique
of the white nationalism, right? Like, how do you, how do you hold on to both of the, both of those
things? And it, it seems, I mean, in each particular case, I mean, I think that's where Nathaniel's
exactly right. It's how do you connect the things that, that matters? And that's where I go,
come back to the, like, what do you make? What comes out of it? It's not just a question of saying,
we need to stop excluding and we need to resolve. And that's just, to me, that's just silly.
You know, everything is exclusion. And let's just, it's a question of how and with what effect.
But that's where Nate, late Nate, my thought process, because that's exactly how I was in grad
school, which is the, the term that everybody is suspect of is the one that I wanted to kind of
lean into. And for me, what changed in that regard was that, and I still have that. So it's still like,
in terms of personal thought experiments and personal collections, but I, or personal orientations,
like I am still like, I do like that move. But for me, it is actually sort of history and cultural
context. So here, my response would be, there's nothing intrinsic to unity that makes it a bad concept.
It means that you can't do the work of contingency with it. We just live in a moment and have lived
in a moment in which unity is, has been mobilized in ways that makes it unhearable to think about the
contingency of unity. And so if you want to do the work of contingency, unity is not going to get you
there, not because of anything intrinsic to the concept, but just because of the economy in which
the concept tends, tends to work today, you know?
Right. Well, it's about how you're interpreted. Most it's like, if you do the work, if you do the
work, you can get it out of those terms.
Absolutely right.
This, this is the issue with reading Zizek. It's like, if you just gloss Zizek, you'll be like,
oh, he's a fascist weirdo, like piece of shit. Like that's just, there's all these strains in his
thinking that you could, if you just take them out of context, you're like, well, he doesn't have the
best interests of anyone in mind. He doesn't even have his own interests in mind. Like he's just a
nihilist. Like these are common readings of him. And it's, if you actually dive into some of his better
texts, you know, less than nothing that are better than the sort of popular texts, like he's, there's a,
there's a rigor to that, that you can't ignore, at least, at least for me. Yeah. And, uh, I mean,
I agree that, you know, you know, I agree like it can be done. I mean, this is where, so Derrida is
quite good on this. He's like concepts in and of themselves aren't metaphysical. There's metaphysical
work that's done with concepts. And so any con, I mean, that's what I always say to grad students in
writing their dissertations is no concept is going to buy you out of the problem. Like by like, oh,
now we're going to talk about hybrids or now we're going to talk about ecologies or now we're going to
talk about networks. Like the premise for a lot of people is that by changing the content of the
concept, we've changed the system. And it's like, no, you've just added another concept into the system
that, that it is a question of how the concept or how any particular concept works and how you make
it work. Uh, and so I, I mean, I agree with you. Can something be done with unity, transcendence, all of
these kinds of dated old concepts. Of course it can. The, the, the, the different question is
what's the point of doing that, right? Like what does one gain by, by taking one of those sort of
traditional terms or, and, and also like, can, can it even be hearable, right? Which is the most
traditional rhetorical question. Like, can you get people to think of this thing that they've spent
their whole lives having an antagonism towards, you know, can you get them to overcome that
antagonism? And is it worth it? Or is it not easier to just, for instance, for the longest time, I didn't,
I really disliked the word affect because I always felt like it's just a stand in for the word emotion.
And most people, when they use affect, they just mean emotion. Again, can Deleuze and Spinoza,
can others do and have done interesting things with the concept? Absolutely. Right. But for the most
part, it just felt like everyone was glomming onto affect because it wasn't thinking and it wasn't
mental and it wasn't all of those things. And it really just became a stand in for emotion.
But then there was a point for me where like, and now in this book, like I have just written a thing
on affect where I'm using, I'm just taking it on because it was finally like, what the fuck is the
point, right? Like, uh, why fight against this emphasis on affect when I don't really have, I don't
really care, you know, per se. I just don't like the way that it's so easily conflated with emotion.
Um, by, by many folks, you know, so this is what's so maddeningly frustrating about publishing
at the moment is that the introduction of concepts and especially the introduction of the right
concepts that we should be thinking with over the old problematic concept is the best way of getting
published. And it's not just a symptom of the Academy. I mean, it is, you know, I think you use this
language in that, in your latest PNR piece that you wrote, that's like, you need to get a product to
market and that product needs to be recognizable and it needs to have a, some familiar foil or
opposition. And like, so, you know, I, I wonder what are the best ways of forcing thinking to happen
when you're not, when it's not otherwise going to happen. And the one way of doing it is to, you know,
obviously be oppositional or take on the last champion term and show how it's, you know, thinking isn't all
that bad. Um, and the other way is to jump inside of the favorable term and make it do unexpected things.
Um, but both of those, you know, yeah, they, they, they are more or less inclined to different kinds of
years. And, you know, it's a, it's a tactical, it's a tactical question, right? Like, I mean, you know,
which battles do you want to fight with which groups in a sense, you know?
I mean, in my experience, I know it doesn't seem to matter which one I take. This is just a sign of my
own immaturity and trying to do those things is that usually what I say gets reduced to something
that I wasn't trying to do. And I become the opposition or I become the, the, the preacher to
the choir and the subtleties just aren't heard. And, you know, whether that's because I'm not
articulating the subtleties well, well enough, or that the, the, the ear is just not capable of
hearing them. I don't know. But yeah, something that I would like to do in this group is try to
practice those moves.
Well, not, not only is thinking not required by the publishing industry, like broadly speaking,
but it's almost forbidden if you're going to latch on to some of these terms, like if you're going to
simply latch on to affect or relationality as basically what turns out to be your God term,
that's, that's the new, that's the new, uh, that's the new concept that solves the problems of reason
and rationality. Like that's been the basic move. I don't know. It seems like in the last decade,
uh, at least in, in rhetoric and composition. It's like, if you, if you simply lean into the,
the foil of one of Hegel's or Descartes concepts and you lean into difference, you're just reproducing,
um, that same system and, and you're not even realizing that. And that's, that's basically,
you go all the way back to Hegel. You find a critique of that move. Um, whatever's in this
critique of the intuitionists. It's like this, it's just this constant, I mean, that's sort of
the dialectic as well. That's like the kind of vulgar, uh, movements of debate where you're just
latching onto positions and you're on, I'm on team affect, you're on team reason and nobody gets
anywhere. Right. Well, here's a concrete example of that is that you really need to account for the
criticisms that new materialism has, um, undergone for not, um, acknowledging it's, that it is hitting
on these, um, concepts that indigenous wisdom has hit on long, long before. And that drives me crazy,
not because there's not worth to, to indigenous concepts or that there isn't a similarity between
the two, but because it focuses all of the emphasis on, okay, this concept and this concept are similar.
Therefore, we should be spending all of our time showing how these two things are similar rather
than trying to activate each one in different milieu to see what they do. So it becomes much more of a
policing kind of work and don't think about it. Just see these two things that are different shades of
each other. They're really the same thing versus see what each one, again, see what each one can do when
it's been activated. That's a really great example for me to explain what I'm saying about my dual,
the current understanding of a duality or the relationship to Hegel is, uh, I would say,
yeah, you keep hearing, I've, I've heard the phrase a lot in the last couple of years of like, um,
what is it? Anti-racist citational practices, right? And I had the same kind of dual response
to it, which are really both genuine. One is on the, on the one hand I go, you know, this is a symptom of
such an attuned, thoughtful, uh, uh, approach to politics that we're now even paying attention to
the things that we cite, right? And, and the ways in which our citational practices create traditions.
And I'm like, that's really interesting and a thoughtful place to, to locate politics, right?
In your fucking work cited in the, you know, index or whatever. Um, the other part of me in terms of
how it's often deployed is this is a scary fucking fascistic policing move to, you know, and I, and,
and that's exactly my response to the Hegel thing as well, which is like, this is both really
interesting and compelling and indicative of a really interesting thinking about look politics.
I mean, it's true. What's true? Work cited does produce traditions, right? It does, but not,
not directly. It's not like my work cited becomes, you know, but that's the way that traditions
get performatively enacted was, which is which things people engage and then the, which things
they feel obligated to engage, right? So that's an interesting place to locate politics. On the
other hand, most people like what you're just saying are like, well, you need to account for this other
thing out there. And it's like, well, why, right? I mean, what, what, I mean, I'm not saying that
there's not value to that thing, but someone else can write that, right? Someone else can write
something. There's nothing in a thing that I'm doing that prevents anyone from doing those things.
It just doesn't facilitate it either, you know? Um, so why, why does any, like your, the essay that
you're talking about, why does that person have to account for? Now, again, if they're making claims
about new materialism, then that's a broader, you know, it is a broader question because they're
entering into a terrain that's been contested, but. Well, it's, they weren't really entering. They were
entering it from a, from a pretty specific vantage point. But what frustrates me about it is it seems
to impoverish both traditions by saying that they're the same, right? And if you only look at the level
of the concept, you can probably get away with a version of that as long as you allied a certain
number of differences, right? Because at a certain point, ecologies, networks, all this kind of stuff,
you know, if you, if you generalize to a certain degree, they're all the same thing. But, you know,
To, to say that, you know, X is just a version of Y seems to just do away with the value and the power
of both X and Y. And while I would, you know, I'm all for encouraging scholarship that would explore,
you know, indigenous orientations to these things, I don't think that the way of, of, of, um, uh,
encouraging and facilitating that scholarship is by forcing differences to be alighted and saying
some, like, someone got there first.
But differences, but that's how differences, I mean, this is back to what we were talking about
before, Nate said before, is like, yet difference, so if difference is the kind of God term of the
last 30 years, you know, but difference as it's mobilized in, say, Derrida is a different kind
of difference than difference as it's mobilized in, because difference in the usual way in which
it's mobilized is identity. I mean, it is, right? Like, it literally means the opposite of what it
has historically meant. So people talk about recognizing, appreciating, and respecting
differences. They're not talking about differences. They're talking about identities that are different
from yours. Um, and, and so that, that's the, that is the oscillation, even within the concept
of difference where, like, well, being on team difference doesn't tell you much, right? Because
you could, you could be in any possible political position, you know? So, but even, even being on team
difference, even if you have sort of a, uh, a basic sophisticated understanding of Derrida, simply
endorsing difference or, you know, that version of getting behind identity, that's still not the move
for me. Like, it's just not, it's not satisfying and it replicates that movement, even if it's more
sophisticated. That's my issue with Barad and people like that is they, you know, whatever, maybe
they misread Derrida or not, but it's that, it's, it's the, it's the latching onto the term
at the expense of the other one that, that doesn't seem to make sense to me. It's, it's like the nature
culture thing. Like you can't, at least you're saying like, you can't have it both ways with
Hegel. Um, well, it's like, why not? I, I literally don't think Barad can have it both
ways with some of these like collapsing of the oppositions. Um, it's too, for me, it's too,
it's too materialist. It's like a naive basic empiricism for me. Right. Yeah. Um, and I, I mean,
I get that. I mean, I do. And it's so the interesting thing, Nate, for instance, in terms
of the Barad thing specifically is I actually totally agree with your critiques. I just don't
think that they're important because, and, and that's not because they're yours or anything
like that. That's just like, I'm willing in that case to say, yeah, those critiques are
right, but they don't matter because the key intervention point is this other thing, which
is the primacy of thinking relationality, you know? And so she's offering, you know, an attempt
like everyone is and attempt at ways of thinking relationality. And so I glom onto that and I
ignore, and I'm not saying this is right. I'm in fact saying it justifies your position.
Is it like, I'm going to ignore some of the stuff that is questionable or problematic because,
you know, as Hegel teaches us, everything is questionable or problematic, you know? So,
so you just, it's the strategic emphasis on where, what are the things that I'm going to sort
of incline positively towards and give the, as you say, the benefit of the doubt and read
more generously? Because the truth is, if you were to read everything generously, things
would actually be pretty indistinguishable.
Yeah. Well, there's plenty of, there's a, there's a Hegelian impulse in Barad. I mean,
just to be clear, I, I love reading Barad, but again, it's with that oppositional, um, sort
of adversarial impulse. I think I'm reading her carefully. It's just like, she obviously wouldn't
really enjoy, I'm guessing some of my responses if she were to ever happen upon them. But I think,
you know, you can, you can still produce something, um, worth reading or useful in that orientation
towards her. If she's a symbol for this basic turn towards relationality, like, I don't know, I feel,
I haven't really read, I have not read a long, um, you know, sustained critique of Barad. It's all
deferential towards her. Everything that I've read, uh, at least in our field.
So that, that's, maybe that's an interesting thing for me, at least that what you just said
could sort of typify what I'm trying to get at in terms of reading Hegel, which is overcoming the
adversarial inclination in reading. And what's really interesting about Hegel is that he both solicits,
I mean, he solicits that adversarial relation and then he incorporates it, right? And so,
and that's what's interesting to me is because there's no move that you can make that he has not
anticipated. And, and so I realize in myself that the desire for an adversarial position is the thing
that he's refusing. He's like, not going to let you have a simple adversarial position that's not
already sort of subsumed or going to be incorporated in, in the system. And that's the thing, the, the,
absence of an adversarial position is what I'm adverse to.
Right. And the, and what was I going to say? Broad, you know, my, my orientation towards her,
um, I think stems from this basic, you know, method of reading. I think I can, I think, I don't know.
I think I can get something useful out of my engagement with her. Like, so this is why my,
I've been latching onto in like last week in some of our conversations, his critique of empiricism,
because it almost seems like I can just like, okay, take this critique, apply it to Barad or
apply it even to someone like Deleuze, if you wanted to tease some of that stuff out. Yeah. Like
it's literally all there. Yeah. Yeah. No, I mean, I, I, I think that you're right. I mean, that's,
that's where I come back to the country music versus hip hop versus, you know, heavy metal or whatever.
It's like, these are sort of, I mean, to me, I just continually return to, it's just a kind of
what sensibility or tonal disposition or something that is the, that's the quote unquote real difference
among these things. Cause like a generous reading of, of Barad or anybody else. I mean, I, I find that
if you do that, here's the thing for me is you guys know me from mostly from my sort of talking in
class or whatever. Like I'm incredibly dismissive of things conversationally, but right for writing
for me, I never do that. Like I very rare, not never, but I mean, I very rarely critique things.
Like the whole invention book was for the most part, avoiding sort of critique in that, in that sense.
And I just found that if I don't have anything generative or productive to say about something,
then I just don't talk about it. And so I'm not going to distinguish this thing from another
thing. I'm just going to talk about this thing. I'm just going to make this in my case, like
affirmative sense of invention. I'm just going to make this, you know, but I'm going to, on the one
hand, like what I do in that book with the dialectical version is to say, that's part of it. And it's also
not all of it. And what I'm interested in is this, you know, the things that it's not, that are not
fully incorporated into it. Um, and I just, I just want to make that, but one could do that to me.
Right. And, and it's just a question of, I increasingly, I'm like, well, I just want to
take the shit that's cool and generative and just assemble those things together and then make
whatever sort of conceptual edifice from that without having to set it in relief against something
that it's not, you know? Um, well, this is something I've been thinking about a lot since,
um, we read the, the, to lose Nietzsche and philosophy book, um, is our, our different styles
of getting a text or, or, um, orienting toward another in order to prompt its response. And,
uh, you know, you were just talking about generous reading there. And I sometimes,
you know, think about what passes as generous reading. Uh, you had, you had said, you know,
if you're, if you read everything sufficiently generously, then the distinctions just start
to disappear. And there are ways in which that those distinctions start to disappear in very
valuable and productive ways. And then there are ways in which it's because something has
just simply been appropriated and everything is what I want it to say. Right. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. And so I was thinking about, is there a way on the critical side that doesn't have to,
like, can you critique or to use the language that, um, you know, Nietzsche and Deleuze were using,
can you attack something without hypostasizing it and showing some kind of gap?
Yeah. And I, I, you know, I'm less and less convinced that, that, that that's impossible,
that, that, you know, a generous reading can be an attacking reading that forces some kind of response
from the text. So it's really just the, the, the next question is if you're going to read something
affirmatively or generously in the way that John, you typically talk about it, then you have to allow
its difference to affect and redirect you. Right. To see. So whatever comes out of it has to be in
some ways, both the surprise to you and the text, but the same thing has to be true. But how can you
know? Right. Like, I mean, I agree with you in terms of describing the dynamics of that, but how do you
know if that's what's happening or if you were merely appropriating a domesticated version thereof?
Like you, you wouldn't. Right. I don't think you know in advance for sure. We're not even in it. Not
even after the fact, like after the fact, like, did I do a generous reading? You know, I don't fucking
know. I mean, uh, so for instance, when you tell me about Žižek's reading of Hegel, like that you've
been using, I, what I think of that is, well, that's a generous or productive reading. Those are the terms
that I always use of Hegel. And can that be done? Absolutely. Is there value to doing that?
Absolutely. Um, is that right and more interesting? Probably, you know, again, the question of right, I
don't really, you know, know what that means, but, but still, and, and I think that here's what I'd
rather traffic in. I'd rather traffic in, and this to me was, is a lesson I learned from Derrida. It
doesn't, it's not the only place to get it, but like when you're going to attack something, go after the
most sort of generous, uh, give it every possible benefit of the doubt before you attack it. And I
found in my thinking that when I do that, when I give it the benefit of the doubt and I give it its
generous reading, I, I lose the ability to attack it, right? Like, because it's not this distinct
hypostasized, as you said, thing anymore. It's actually so diffuse. And I suddenly go, I don't see
how Hegel and Deleuze are really different. Uh, you know, and, and so I just, I lose the, the attacking
thing or, or maybe the attack is being done at such a sort of imminent level that in reconfiguring
Deleuze to Hegel to Hegel to Deleuze or whatever, that, um, you know, the attack doesn't look like
what we normally think of as an attack, which is two external things meet, you know, meeting one
another, you know, well, that that's definitely right. I mean, when you're really in the weeds
with a text, even if the, the initial orientation is oppositional, you're going to get to the point
where like in Derrida, like in his reading of Husserl, like where the, the thinking is indistinguishable
from, you know, the person you're critiquing the object. And so, but, but the, some of Derrida's
best writing is, is when he's in that attack mode. And I, I learned more about Husserl in,
in that, in his sort of book on him than I have ever reading Husserl. So it's like, you
can, you can gain a lot out of, uh, out of those kinds of, uh, adversarial orientations.
Again, if you're really getting into the technical conceptual material, because then you're actually
invested in it. You're not just aiming to destroy it.
Right. Right. Well, I mean, as long as you're not aimed at showing where it fails or where
there are gaps that if, you know, in the sort of, uh, literal is the wrong word, but the
very rigorous reading of the thing that, you know, attacks it or just intensifies it, like
just follows it very rigorously to say like, Oh, this thing is way more interesting than
I thought it was because it does something I didn't expect or does something that perhaps
even the author doesn't expect or wouldn't, wouldn't expect. You know, you can get those
little lines from Derrida in spite of Plato or in virtue of some kind of ironic foresight
or, you know, who really cares. Right.
Question. Well, the, the, the who really, but the who really cares matters because if you
simply say, you know, that's one of the, the beefs that I have with Derrida sometimes is
that he does residually rely on this notion of intention in order to be able to claim that
you're reading someone against a grain, you're presuming that there's a grain. And, and I
get that the grain is the sort of historical reception, right? I mean, and I understand
that that's a reasonable way of saying this at the same time, once the person writes, I
mean, this would be a Derrida claim. Once that Plato or whoever the figure is writes, it's
no longer Plato, right? So it's no longer a question of simply, you know, this guy. It's
a question of writing. And because it's a question of writing, there isn't, there really isn't
a sort of who they really are. And, and that's where in the terrain that we're dealing with,
you do, you always have to do labor or some kind of work, right? Uh, in order to, you know,
at least for me, make some of those things in order for me to read them generously, it requires
effort on my part. Whereas for instance, to read Nietzsche generously doesn't require any
effort. I just sort of, you know, or maybe I've just done that effort over so many years that it
doesn't feel like effort anymore. Where it's just like, yeah, of course he said that anti-Semitic
Thing there, but that thing is going to be countered by all of these other things in other places.
Um, so I just, I immediately do this sort of deferential generous, generous read. Whereas I'm
looking with the Hegel, I'm like, this thing pisses me off. Like I see a moment that pisses
me off. And I'm like, yes, I know that he's anticipating that it's going to piss off and
that my response is also incorporated, but it takes me time to get there. You know? Um,
that it's the process of, of, in many ways, it's the process of disconfiguring Hegel or
whoever that you're reading away from them being a person writing from a position to being writing,
you know? Yeah. And the, the issue, the, the, the main, why Barad's important to me is because
she's symptomatic of a certain, you know, empiricist orientation and that orientation, what it, the,
the temptation to reach for a ding on Zik, a thing in itself to think that you're writing about the
world and that you're not writing about discourse, that temptation to move past the complexity of the
concept of, of conceptuality of discourse of language is so strongly felt today. Like the,
the, the turn to materiality, the, the critique of the linguistic turn. That's so, it's basically
just a given now we've moved past the, the, the concept. We're now into all these other things.
Let's write about the world. Let's, let's collect a bunch of, uh, you know, material things and,
and, and just say stuff about that, uh, instead of what Hegel says right at the beginning,
I think of the Phenomenology, you're not, you're not investigating the thing, which is really at stake,
which is how you interface with the world and, and with discourse.
Right. Well, I think here's one reason why we're so invested in moving beyond the concept and beyond
discourse is that one thing that happened within that discourse is people got pretty comfortable
with the idea that discourses exist, right? And that concepts exist. And as soon as that gets
hypothesized, you know, then you can be done with it. And then you can, the God discourses are somehow
different than the world. And, you know, that's where, you know, as I started pushing on this,
that's where, I mean, and, and Nate alluded to this, to this before of like, you know, when you're
saying you could take this critique from Hegel and just apply it to Barad, that's where for me,
that thinking is what leads me down the road of this fucking history thing is way overblown,
right? Like we really, really, really have been having the same conversations for as long as we've
been having conversations that the terminology shifts, the milieu shifts, but like the, the dynamic
is that in a sense, nothing has changed, right? Which I get is a totally Hegelian, you know, it's,
it's, uh, but, but there's no progress to this history. There is just shifting. You don't even
want to say ebbs and flows, because there aren't two sides, right? It's, it's much more multiplicitous.
So you see now I'm in Deleuze. Right, right. Well, I don't want to get too, too far into my project
right now, but the, the emphasis on the, the empiricist mindset, um, for me is just so,
so strongly felt that it feels like you need a response to that right now. Um, that, that like,
I don't know, it just, it, it feels like we're leaning into a mode of thinking that is both necessary
and it, for me problematic. Like the problem with empiricism is not what it does because it does
plenty of good things. It's, it's literally the basis of like, you know, certain forms of scientific
progress and technological progress. You need that mode of thinking. It's, it's, it's what it thinks
it's achieving past that. It's, it's, it thinks it's doing something other than just being useful.
It thinks it has the answers to how the world works. And that's where the arrogance of someone
like Barad is distasteful for me. Yeah. I get, I get that, but so I, and I get what you're saying
in terms of the connections, but let me say, I also feel like the empirical portion of Barad
is, I, I get why you're saying it's, it's, it's the thing that's driving the turn to the materiality
and the objects, but the empirical part in terms of scientific knowledge is one that like,
almost no one that takes her up even talks about that, right? Like they're not concerned with the
sciences, you know, and most people are not. Everyone, I'm sure there are physics oriented
people, but, but by and large, it seems to me that the actual scientific part of what
Barad is, is doing in there is just something that is kind of ignored and glossed over and
not even engaged, you know? You're right. You're right. Sorry. I feel like I'm a little all over
the place, but, um, the, there's many flavors of empiricism, you know? Yeah. And Barad, Barad's
empiricism can get easily translated to a sort of more general emphasis on relationality. So that's
where the, the conceptual material just kind of really nicely slides over into the humanities proper,
as opposed to just being in, in physics or theoretical physics. Right. Right. You know?
So it makes me want to go back to, it makes me want to go back to John's suspicion of history,
right, writ large, because, um, you know, the, there, there are sort of like two notions of this
historicity that I think that you were bringing up. And one is the inescapability of the Hegelian notion of,
of, of, of history wherein, um, you know, yes, there is this teleological progress, but everything
is incorporated in, into the whole. Right. And so history matters there, not, um, history,
history matters there for a very different reason than I think what you were talking about, which is,
um, you know, I don't think we're just having the same conversations over and over again. And,
but I also don't think that we're progressing towards something or we're progressing away
from things. But I think that we are, there are constantly new alliances between different kinds
of writing that, um, create different senses. So, you know, as Nate was saying, empiricism isn't
empiricism isn't empiricism. Like when you zoom out to a certain level, yeah, it's all empiricism or it's all
whatever. But as soon as you zoom in and figure out, all right, no, this particular kind of empiricism
only is able to come out of these kinds of particular alliances, which then
intones, this particular sense, which then allows it to, you know, connect to other kinds of things,
that kind of stuff matters. And that kind of like, I take it where Nate is, is concerned is that a
particular species of empiricism is gets generated out of Barad that allows itself to become allied
within rhetoric and composition fields in some unnerving ways. And, you know, I think the Hegelian
movement would be saying, that's fine. It'll, it'll self negate and transform. But the other thing to say is,
like, that's gonna, like, if you don't take up that position, then that can become kind of scary
because it leads to just a brand of empirical totalitarianism. And as a total aside, you know,
is what worries me about all of the, um, sort of like return to truth in an age of misinformation
age, not because I'm down with misinformation. I mean, like, that's, you know, obviously the most
present and immediate target. I'm worried about a backlash that turns to the sanctity of truth and
fact and, you know, trustworthy news in a totally fascistic way. You know, that's, that's two steps
down. So I'm not expending a ton of energy. And, and, and, and related to that, this is a similar
thing. Like I get Nate's disposition towards, uh, against the kind of what we would call the material
component of ret comp. Um, I'm still, or I grew up in a time in which you just couldn't talk about stuff
in the field of rhetoric because rhetoric was language. And I mean, even anyone's efforts to do
so, I mean, I remember when Debbie, you know, the, the bodily stuff and she was getting those responses.
And this is 20 plus years ago, you know, and people were like, that's not really rhetoric because
you're not talking about language. And so, so that's where for me, for instance, just given my itinerary
through this thing and this field, um, I'm willing to overlook the kind of sloppy applications,
what I would say conceptually sloppy applications of new materialism, because I see them as part of
of this thing that's complicating the language centered fetishizing that is the field
of rhetoric and composition for, for the most part. So, you know, there, there are particular people
who I read their stuff and I'm like, nah, that's fine. And yes, there's ecologies and networks and
whatever. But I mean, um, but I just, it doesn't bother me because I see it as a kind of offshoot or
side effect of this very important challenge to the language centered, um, version of things.
But I, I would say that I also, I mean, part, so partly it's a difference in terms of the time
that we come into the field and what's considered the, the norm. So, you know, the norm that you're
encountering in a very theory centric program at South Carolina is different than the norm that I
encountered, you know, 20 years ago, uh, in that, in a different circumstance. So, right. I can't,
I can't see the progression as clearly as you guys, obviously. I mean, like, so the, the, the reaction
against the linguistic or social turn, uh, sort of generated the material turn, but now that is
sedimented. I mean, as long as I've been in grad school, the material turn has been the rule. It's
been like, this is what we should be focused on. Yeah, but, but Nate, read RSQ, read RSQ though. It's not
there. I mean, it's not, they don't have it. No, you're right. I mean, again, some of the best,
uh, rhetorical theorists, at least that I've. The theory types. The theory types. Yes, I agree with
you. The theory types are into a, some variation of, uh, some kind of material, you know. Which,
again, is not, it's not bad in itself. I mean, Debbie, you brought up Debbie. I mean,
she's sort of an interesting case because she's still writing about language. I mean, she's,
she's incorporating, um, animal subject matter and in a, in a kind of a strange way, but it's
like, at least her recent book, um, Rhetoric and Tooth and Claw. Like it's about the effects
of animality on language or vice versa. It's so it's, it's this constant co-productive,
uh, movement there, which is more nuanced, uh, than, you know, the, the strict adherence to like
an ecological, uh, Yeah, I agree. Orientation. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, but, but that's the,
that's the sense in which, so that's a way of responding to Nathaniel's course. Like history
matters in the sense of when we enter into the discourse and how it gets configured for us
is going to determine to a certain extent our allies, our alliances, and our, our affinities.
And yet I can still say that I feel like this conversation or the rather that conversation,
the, the materiality V language is idealism versus materialism is foundationalism versus
anti-foundationalism is, you know, we can play rational, right. We can play that whole thing back.
And now to be clear, each of those iterations is distinctive. And I don't want to simply,
again, I feel like I'm just saying Hegel, like I'm just speaking the Hegelian historical line,
like each of those iterations is distinctive. I don't simply want to conflate them. But for me,
I increasingly lend towards like our conversations in philosophy are always, are just variations on
themes. Like that's what we've been doing is we've been, we've taken a series of musical notes and then
we just run variations on those musical notes. And then a hundred years later, you know, a bunch of
people are doing variations on those notes and they just, and they have the same relations among them.
They have the same, uh, uh, um, uh, aversions and affinities. And, and, and we, it's like,
well, what has, what has changed other than the terminology, the people, the cultural specificity,
which is a lot, but that the conversation is, uh, really not all that different.
Just as it, sorry, just one quick point about music to just as like in music, when the farther and
farther you travel away from, you know, home base, that the tonal note, the more complex the music
gets. So the more you differentiate, the more you travel away from home, uh, the, and you know,
it's, it's much more dissonant. It's more confusing, but that's where the complexity of music lies. And to me,
it's the same thing with, uh, with theory or philosophy, the more you're willing to, to travel
away from what you're comfortable with that sort of comfort of that, that tonic note, like that's
that you get into this really uncomfortable space, but you end up basically, you can't endorse anything.
That's the Hegelian position. You're just differentiating and moving away from,
from targets as opposed to, you know, reifying them. Yeah. I think, I mean, I, I, I already kind
of said this, but I, I think that the major difference again is, um, the way you think
historicity and it'd be, I think what I'm suggesting is you have to think historicity without a line.
Like there's very clearly a line of progression for Hegel. Yeah. And I, I think the kind of historicity
that you're talking about has no line because there can be no progression. There is just
a massive stuff and it's constantly differently articulating and self-transforming, but there is,
there, there is no line that it's running out. It's never before it's all glad in there.
Yeah. Um, yeah. Which means that like appropriation happens all the time. I think this is the other
big difference in styles of appropriation is, is in that sense of history, there are,
there's a multiplicity of appropriations, right? There are appropriate appropriations of different
size and volume and intensity and speed and whatever else that are, there's always a bigger fish kind
of appropriation, right? That's the, that's the, like the, it's like the syntheses and Anti-Oedipus
from Hegel, from Kant, right? Like the conjunctive, disjunctive, like, yeah, there are different
types of syntheses. There are, are, are different modes of relation, conceptual relationality, you know,
and that that's where the activity is actually happening, you know, is the, is the different
types of syntheses that occur. But the, but with Hegel, there's only one kind and it only goes in one
direction and they're never, the smaller ones are always a part of a more coherent whole,
right? And so the ultimate at a macro level, there's only one appropriation. It looks something
like, got to do the hand gestures, right? Which is great for, um, audio, audio only podcast,
but you know, there's the whole, and excuse the fact that I have two hands, but then there's the
self-differentiation and then the reappropriation in itself, but that is always at the level of the whole,
right? Um, and yeah, that's just totally different than, you know, a thousand and one
kinds of appropriations and a thousand and one kinds of syntheses that happen at different scales
that never constitute a whole. And that's, that gives two different senses of history.
Yeah. I mean, I think you're, you're both right. And in terms of like playing out the, these differences
between a kind of Deleuzian perspective and the Hegelian one. But I do think that totality or
unity in Hegel is, is based in a principle of like dissolution or non-resolution. So the totality for
Hegel is kind of the same thing as a multiplicity. If you think about it, because you know, it's about,
it's about trying to reckon with that totality. The totality is not something comforting. It's the, it's the historical, the, the
unfolding of, of temporality into itself. So it's like, this is a, this is a totality that, that
gives us virtually no comfort at all. And how do we reckon with that? It's not the, it's not the same
thing as like a, as Descartes unified subject. Right. Oh, I agree with that certainly. I mean,
there's no question that the necessity of negation and you know, when he says subject is pure negation,
like subjectivity at its core is pure negation, right? Like, um, there, there's no way that you
could get the Cartesian subject from, from that. Um, so, so, I mean, I, I, I agree with you. And, and so
you're right. Like you can get that. I mean, again, that's where, I mean, I just end up continually
coming back to this notion of, I guess I'm less interested, maybe I'm starting to become less
interested in the explanatory force of philosophy and more interested in the, what I would simply
call like the sexiness of it. Right. Like how cool is this thing? How interesting is this thing? How,
how, I mean, that's it, right? Like, so that's, it's just another song and it's like, it's just a
question. The song is not, you know, the explanatory force that the song has is less interesting than
can you dance to it? You know, can I take the sexiness to the next level? What is it? Genesis,
right? What Genesis? You're talking Phil Collins now?
I can hear you. I felt like we've been going, been going too serious for too long. So I needed to
interject. True, true. Yeah, that's good. Some Phil Collins comedy. Well, since we burned our first
hour, which we're about to do, but no, look, I actually think that this conversation is
an important one, right? I mean, yeah, I mean, yeah, a lot of what I, a lot of what I've been,
a lot of what I've been blurting out is sort of stuff that's been churning in me as we've been
reading and writing notes on this stuff. At least in my reading, you know, in terms of my project,
this works so cleanly as a critique of empiricism or of someone like Barad, because empiricism purports
to know the real shape of knowledge. It's, again, it's that about the world that's the pre-reflexive
kind of disposition. So, you know, it's empiricism rather than Hegel's idealism. That's the actually
naive kind of, so many isms in here, but is the actually naive formalism because it doesn't recognize
itself as such. It's just like, right. So it's, it's focused on eminent relations. That's the claim
of Barad. We're, we're focused on relations before Relata. Well, that becomes just another religion
for someone like Hegel. The eminence is already given. It's not truly interrogated like how we got
there. I completely agree that, and in particular, I agree with empiricism, which imagines that it
doesn't deal with form. It just deals with stuff. And because it thinks that it's just dealing with
stuff, it ignores the form that produced that stuff, and it takes it just as an artifact, right?
Exactly. Yep. Yeah. Yeah, but it doesn't, yeah.
If one does a generous reading, either here or of Barad, I feel like if, if the claim is that
phenomena are primarily relations, that can't be a commentary on the world. It has to be a commentary
on a relation, right? It has to be. I mean, whether it says so explicitly or not, like,
here's what we've discovered. Relations are primary. Ah, well, that's the new God term. Then
we're going to go around looking, ah, there's a relation. There's a relation. There's a relation.
It's like, no, you, you haven't just discovered relations. You've discovered, because they're not
just things in the world, that relationality is itself the product of relation. You know,
So it's, I mean, it would have to be built in that the perception of relationality is itself a relative
or a relational perception. So, you know, it couldn't be, it couldn't make claims about the world.
Um, you know, given that it's, given that it's thesis is relationality, it couldn't just say,
Here's what really is true. It's now relations when we thought it was something else. Here's what's
really out there. Well, that's what I would normally, like, to think Barad does, but it's, you know,
when I was preparing for, to read Nate's, um, uh, prospectus, I read, um, I forget which article
by Barad, but like the big one, uh, that makes that kind of the post, the post-humanist post-humanist.
And the one that's complains about too much language. We need to go back to the material.
And they're like, she really explicitly in several places starts talking about these relations as
like the basic units. Yeah, I agree. Yeah. Right. And that, like, that's where I, I think that she's,
she's doing exactly what, what Nate suggests. And then, so the question is, I mean, you're right.
I think your read is the more generous read. And so the question would be to like, what happens when
you say, all right, these are the basic units and guess what? They aren't stuff, or you can't do
what you think you're doing with them. So let's take this brilliant insight that you have, run it
through the rest of your discourse and see how it gets, how it remakes what you're saying.
Or the, or the other, the other twist back on the question of reading is to say,
given that she can't be making claims about the empirical world, given that it's relational,
Yes.
Then the claims that she appears to be making about the empirical world aren't that.
And, and so, so that would be the way of attributing to her an awareness or self-consciousness
of the thing that she's doing, as opposed to, you know, correcting and saying like, well,
she doesn't understand the value of her own insights. I will add, I will add that in.
There's another way of reading that, which is she has to understand the value of her own insights.
Otherwise her thing doesn't make any sense. And so that's, that's what I take,
what Zizek has done for Hegel is he, you know, he, he does that second move, which is to say,
like, this isn't me correcting Hegel's insights. This is just what Hegel does. And there's no other,
you know, Hegel doesn't make sense if you don't think of it. Like if you, if you really buy the
progressive line, it doesn't make any sense. And, and I, I mean, I get that. I think that that's a
fair point, right? Like you can't really have progress from pure negation. I mean, you know,
you just can't get there from here. And so all of those claims to progress have to be doing something
else. They can't actually be claims about progress. So do you attribute it to them as something that
they've done consciously or not for Hegel, it matters obviously, but for us, like in terms of
Barad, who cares whether she's conscious of it or not? You say like her work can't allow her to make
what looks like empirical claims. And so therefore these can't be empirical claims, even though they
sound and smell like empirical claims. So what other kind of claims is she making there?
Right. It, it does, it, it, I mean, you're right. You know, you're right in the fact that she can't be
wrong. It's that, it's not simply that Barad is wrong. It's that she, she does, uh, tend towards the
language of origin and primordiality, uh, specifically when it comes to these terms
like phenomena and, and, and relationality. And it's like the, the, the thing that she doesn't,
she doesn't flip it back over. So it's, it's still an equal sign for her, but you know, Hegel's famous
substance is subject for Barad. It's the other way around. And only it's, it's subject is substance.
And that's, that's how, that's the predicative logic for Barad. Substance comes first and the
subjectivity is a species of materiality. Um, and so conceptuality comes after materiality as a
variation of that. And that, that's, again, that's not a claim that she like outright makes, but that's
the, that's the sort of logic of, of the entire book. Yeah, it can, it can be, but that's what,
that's where I'm saying, like, you can read that differently. And that, that's where it is.
Uh, that's, for me, it comes back to a style question is that like, you know, if, if that can
be read against the, the, the, the approach that you just proposed, if it's possible to do so, then,
then you're pursuing that line is a stylistic dispositional choice. It's not, it's not that you're
right or wrong. Like we can throw that out in terms of being right and wrong about Barad or about
Anyone who's, you know, doing any of this stuff. Yeah. Um, you know, so it's, so that's where I
say to you, and a lot of what I was responding to in your, like the dis, the proposal defense and
that sort of shit is like, why are you so insistent on telling people that they're wrong instead of
just, because you can, you can flip that coin and you can do, for instance, when I was talking before,
like about the generous reading stuff for the invention book, like I was quite well aware and
conscious of the fact that when I was doing that with some of these figures, I was doing a kind of
violence or it felt like I was doing a kind of violence. Like the violence was, I'm going to
make them more interesting than their own thing is, you know, or my perception of that. I'm not,
you know, whatever, but I'm going to make them more interesting, but I'm going to attribute it to them,
right? Like I'm going to say, uh, so-and-so's article on audience and rhetorical studies
is actually more interesting than it, than it seems like it is, that it does these other things. And I
wasn't attributing the agency to me of having done that work. I'm attributing it to the, to the writing
as having done that work. And, and by doing that, you lose the edge of critique, right? You know,
that it just becomes like, hey, it might look like this is empiricism for Broad, but obviously it can't
be given that her object, quote unquote object is relationality and relationality ain't a fucking
object. So it, she, it would look like she's making a claim about the primordial nature of
relationality, but she can't be. So those claims have to function otherwise. And this is where Barad
gets really interesting is in her, her, her kind of, you know, it's the same things that you like about
Zizek and Hegel. Her, she's not averse to making empirical transcendent essentializing claims. It's
like, well, that's pretty cool. Right. So suddenly Barad could start to look like Zizek in that regard.
You know, you're right. You're right. I mean, think of it as an equation and the equation that you gave
before where subject equals substance, then you say, all right, well that would under normal reading of
substance that would run you into all of these empirical kinds of claims. But given the way that
she articulates substance, then that entire equation needs to get rethought, which means that Barad's
implementation or incorporation into the rhetorical field has suddenly this much more productive avenue
to go down because the entire, it has to, it's a little antigen that gets in there. Well, substance
got to get remade. You're, you're right. What's interesting about this conversation right
now to me though, is that I don't think we would have gotten that more interesting version, potentially
more interesting version of Barad that you just articulated that you both did without me confronting
the text initially. That's fine. You know what I, you know what I mean? It's like what I'm doing,
even if it's a confrontational or kind of, you know, even arrogant, adversarial, like that's,
it's generative of something. Somebody's going to respond to that. I mean, that's kind of what it's designed
to do. So I'm open to more interesting versions of Barad, but I haven't seen those.
So that's what I'm pushing, you know, that's what I want. It's that, it's that Barad gets codified as this,
uh, you know, just this sort of mantra of relationality that just become, again, it becomes
this shapeless, uh, version of, you know, interpretation that, you know, people just ape her
and there's just less and less interesting Barads out there.
Your version of it requires the sort of adversarial agent, you know, adversarial role that you played
to, to then have us offer a kind of synthesis move. But what I'm sort of saying is you could have done
that on your own in reading her, right? And that other people in reading her didn't do that.
Um, and I, I certainly grant that, I unequivocally grant that, but that, you know, and I'm not saying
it's your responsibility. I'm not saying that at all. I'm simply saying the move is one that doesn't
require the distinction of steps that you're talking about. Like, I don't think you first have to have
the adversarial relation and then have to have a synthetic moment that you can have just a sort of,
you know, a move that says, all right, well, without being adversarial, what's her claim here,
given that it can't be what it looks like or what I think it looks like? That's what we all do when
we're learning discourses, right? Is we just, we're like, what the fuck are they saying? Because I don't
really know Aristotle, I'm reading Aristotle for the first time, and it seems to be saying this,
but it couldn't possibly be because it just said that. So what do I do with that?
Before we become trained in what Aristotle said, we always do those kinds of moves to try to figure
stuff out. And so I'm saying, like, you don't have to have the adversary synthesis, negation synthesis
moves, you know, as discreetly. That's all. Although the critical work can open up a lot. I mean,
I think the only issue for me is whether or not the critical move is there to erase or dismiss
the other position. But like, if the goal of the criticism is to say, all right,
everyone is taking Barad up as the sort of monologic thing without, and it's very difficult for
anything new to come out of it. I'll be the wrecking ball that crashes into it, that forces
people to actually have to grapple with some of this stuff. And yeah, I might have some inclination for
some interesting ways in which that goes, but that is already kind of predetermining the path
that it's going to go. And I'm more interested in, well, to use some of that language, diffracting,
like running myself into it as a diffractor that will, that will make a lot of these upshot or
these uptakes untenable and then not end that essay with or the dissertation with. And now we should
ignore Barad, but say like, no, now this is the beginning where we start grappling with some of this
really important stuff that Barad has given us the opportunity to deal with.
So that's a way of saying like, the negative critique moment can't be an end point. It has
to be, it has to be a sort of starting point. And from which, that's where for me, when I do do critique,
I always find it once the sort of critique thing is done, I have to, you know, I've sort of mapped
out the, you know, here's why relationality can't be an object or the equivalent thereof. And I will
always go back and say, and Barad shows us that in these, in these moments in her text, right? And so
I'll always then fold it back into the thing and say, this thing was there. It just took a process
for me to get to saying that this thing was there, right? I mean, that's what, what I often like about
Deleuze is he skips that process, right? Like he's just like, everybody knows Barad is the great
thinker of non-empiricism or of a spiritualized materialism. Advanced empiricism. Yeah, whatever.
Advanced empiricism. Well, like transcendental empiricism is the term that gets bandied about.
And, um, you know, like cool, right? Like that's, that's one way of doing it, of folding it back into
the thing, even though you have to unpack it. But still, I mean, so, but coming back to this passage,
and it relates is I still am hung up on the extrinsic and intrinsic thing. Like the necessity,
the necessity of self-originating, self-differentiating wealth of shapes, that that's the good, the good
sort of manifestation of spirit is that it must be, it's very Aristotelian in that regard, right? Like
it must be generated from the self and not be externally imposed because external imposition would
be, you know, that, that's, that's the boring show of diversity. It's just like, it's the cookie
cutter method driven, but an internal self-differentiation is not, right? Um, I don't,
yeah, maybe, I mean, maybe Nathaniel, do your, do what you said again. And let me listen to it
better. I'll, I'll listen to it tonight. I mean, I'll listen to it tonight when we listen to the
audience. Yeah, you can listen. I will. Yeah. I mean, I think that the line between the, um, uh,
internal and external and esoteric and exoteric is, is very, very thin because the exoteric comes from
the, um, the, um, and the, um, what's the internal language here? I mean, I think one comes from the
other and it's not a sign like the external is not that which comes from other than the, the notion
because that would be impossible within Hegelianism. That's what I, that's what I think, right? But
when he says, but a closer inspection that shows that this expansion has not come about through one
and the same principle spontaneously assuming different shapes, but rather through the shapeless
repetition of one and the same formula only externally applied to diverse materials,
thereby obtaining the boring show of diversity. The idea, which is of course true enough on its own
account remains in effect, always in a primitive condition. If its development involves nothing
more than this sort of repetition of the same repetition of the same formula. When the notice.
Okay. So here's an example of that. I'll try to, to try to, um, stick closer to what we're doing. Take
like some version of relativism, right. As, as a, um, as an intellectual progression within the unveiling of
spirit and relativism begins as this very simple notion that these, um, you know, identities are not
atomistic, that they're not, you know, self-sustaining and it continually critiques and shows, um, uh,
the non-identity of all of these supposed identities. And it's constantly spontaneously demonstrating
and working through the, the specifics of relativism to the point where it matures itself to the point
where it can just very easily show no identity is self-identical and that it's always presumed upon
a prior relationship. And, and that's all it can say. And that's when, you know, it's not that, um,
it's not that some new external comes in, but it's that the inside externalizes itself and calcifies to
the point where it can only render the world and only can encounter the world by demonstrating, um,
failed identities as actual relationships. And that's when everything becomes cookie cutter.
So it's actually a matter of intensification rather than the introduction of something new.
And that requires that husky to get broken through by something else, perhaps a return to a more
interesting version of essentialism, right? Or a more nuanced version of relativism or something
like that, that then has to go back and remake all of this stuff. That's the way I'm reading it.
Yeah. The, the empirical, the empirical orientation is a failed formalism for Hegel because it doesn't
recognize itself as such materiality is posited. That's that was Butler's point that I put in my
prospectus that I think you, you kind of bristled against John. Like I was trying to articulate like
the complexity of Butler's sort of notional framework here. And she basically says that materiality has
to be posited. That's its constitutive condition. And what that means for the empiricist, that's not
the case. And materiality is out there in the world to be seen and appreciated and worked upon. And you
know, it's our job to do that. For an idealist, for, for Hegel, for post Hegelians, matter must be
posited, which means that the presupposition is primary. It's the, it's the same as the Nietzschean
point about the, the, the metaphorics of, of sense perception and conceptuality. Matter must be
posited. And then you must also forget that process of positing it. And, and so that's inescapable.
So the empiricist mindset is in a sense inescapable, but you can reflect on it and you can turn it over
and then recognize that capacity. So this would, in other words, the kind of empiricism that you're
talking about here isn't a traditional empiricism, but an empirical orientation to just anything. In other
words, there is that kind of empirical impulse within say rationalism, where the positing of
rationalism is forgotten that now suddenly, you know, the kinds of artifacts that rationalism is,
is capable of producing just get replicated, um, uh, senselessly or however he puts it here.
A boring show of diversity. Yeah. Because we're leading into the night in which all cows are black,
right? I mean, that's where, that's where this is going to go is that these are just sort of,
I mean, monochromatic formalism says it perfectly. So we've got, you have diversity in this system.
I guess I do think of it in, I actually think of it in the terms of, you know, like, here's a mammal,
here's a reptile, here's a, right? Like here's the, the, the category. And then you, you know,
you discover lots of diverse things, insects, birds, whatever, whatever. But, but that, uh,
the diversity is all always underwritten by an implicit taxonomy of species, genus.
To the point where you, where everybody knows that the platypus is a mammal. Right? Right. Right.
And that thing's a mammal and nothing's a, nothing's a mammal. Right. Um, but I, I get, I still,
I just have issues with the internal external sort of framing of that because it, because as you said,
it just doesn't seem to me that anything could be externally imposed given the sort of condition
of the spirit. And this becomes a, for, to my reading, a sort of subtle way of saying, well,
you can't really do a critique except for I'm going to do it here. You know, uh,
Think about the, um, internal and external sides of say like your skin, right? Uh, it's, you know,
the externality isn't out here outside of my skin. The external externality is just the surface of the
skin. It's not doing all that much. It's already been genesis by some, you know, gene. And that
now is just doing it's much more limited, you know, dead skin thing. That's the way I see it is that it's
not like, there's no space between the internal and the external.
Bye.